---
title: Vol 1 - Chapter 1 - Surmounting the Absence of Philosophy in Our Age
feed: show
date: 2020-03-01
---

<ins>Daisaku Ikeda</ins>: Now is the time to engage in an earnest discussion of religion's role in the next century. With the collapse of communism and a pervasive absence of philosophy in our age, humanity is now searching beyond the present for a powerful new philosophy. People are searching for something that will satisfy the spiritual emptiness they feel, something that will revive their weary lives and fill them once again with hope and vigor. Humanity is searching for the wisdom that will provide true direction and purpose to the individual and society.

&emsp;&emsp;Whether it be the war-torn states of the former Yugoslavia, the affluent industrialized nations, the disordered former socialist states or the poverty-stricken Third World, humanity is beginning to recognize that something is wrong with the world today, when economic growth is viewed as the supreme imperative. We are starting to recognize that people must come first and that human growth may be what is most important. We are coming to understand that, in our information-oriented societies with their explosion of knowledge, we urgently need a matching explosion of wisdom to use that knowledge properly.

&emsp;&emsp;Something is wrong. Something is missing. Scientific developments alone cannot bring happiness. Neither socialism nor capitalism can save us. No matter how many conferences we hold, how we stress ethics and morality or lecture on human psychology or philosophy, something essential is lacking. This, I believe, is a fair description of humanity's present state of mind.

&emsp;&emsp;The French author Antoine de Saint-Exupery, well known for his book *The Little Prince*, writes:

> We have to understand that somewhere along the way we have taken the wrong road. Humanity as a whole is richer than ever before. We enjoy unsurpassed affluence and leisure time. Yet something more basic, something indefinable is lacking. The sensation of ourselves as human beings becomes gradually more and more rare. We have lost something that was one of our mysterious perogatives. [^1]

&emsp;&emsp;Humanity has taken the wrong road, he says. Where are we going and for what purpose?

&emsp;&emsp;This question reminds me of the famous scene in the Lotus Sutra. When the multitude of bodhisattvas appeared out of the earth in the "Emerging of the Earth" chapter, the boddhisatva Maitreya asks Shakyamuni to explain

> where they have come from,  
> what causes and conditions bring them together!  
> [(LSOC, 256)](https://www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/lsoc/Content/15#para-33)

&emsp;&emsp;Maitreya asks this as a representative of all who are assembled.

<ins>Katsuji Saito</ins>: Shakyamuni praises Maitreya for asking such an important question. And in reply, Shakyamuni preaches the most important teaching of the entire Lotus Sutra, which is contained in ["The Life Span of the Thus Come One"](https://www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/lsoc/Content/16) [hereafter referred to as the "Life Span"] chapter.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Maitreya's query is indeed important. I'd like to discuss its significance from a doctrinal perspective on another occasion. Put quite simply, however, it comes down to the questions: Where have we come from? For what purpose were we born in this world?

<ins>Takanori Endo</ins>: I am reminded of the impromptu poem you recited before [the second Soka Gakkai president] Josei Toda at the first Gakkai discussion meeting you attended as a young man. This scene is recounted in *The Human Revolution*

> Traveler,  
> From whence do you come?  
> And where do you go?  
> The moon has set,  
> But the Sun has not yet risen.  
> In the chaos of darkness before the dawn  
> Seeking the light,  
> I advance  
> To dispel the dark clouds from my mind  
> To find a great tree unbowed by the tempest,  
> I emerge from the earth. [^2]

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: As a young person struggling amid the chaos of postwar Japan, I was trying earnestly to find the meaning of life. Then I met Mr. Toda. Here was a man who had been imprisoned for his opposition to the Japanese militarist government [during World War II]. Instinctively, I felt I could trust him. My encounter with Mr. Toda was my encounter with the Lotus Sutra. All human endeavor is inspired by the effort to answer the questions: Where do we come from? Where we are going? Why we are here?

<ins>Haruo Suda</ins>: The issue then becomes what philosophy, religion or belief system can provide clear answers to those questions. Though an entire nation may have been reduced to ashes by war, its people's future will remain bright as long as a positive philosophy still pulses in their hearts.

<ins>Saito</ins>: That is also the philosophy of the Lotus Sutra.

<ins>Suda</ins>: On the other hand, if people's hearts are laid to waste, their future will be dark even if they live in an affluent society.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Precisely. I am reminded of the words of Austrian psychologist Viktor Frankl, who, describing the contemporary state of mind, said that "our hearts have been bombed." [^3] Dr. Frankl is well known for surviving imprisonment in a World War II Nazi concentration camp.

<ins>Endo</ins>: Yes, and he wrote a famous book about that experience.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Dr. Frankl writes: "The abuse of every kind of passion has resulted in an age in which all types of idealism have been destroyed. While we would normally expect to find the younger generation extremely passionate and idealistic, today's generation, today's youth, have no ideals at all." [^4] Dr. Frankl is saying that young people have lost the meaning of living.

<ins>Endo</ins>: The concentration camps were the epitome of an environment that completely destroyed all human dignity and meaning in life. Yet even there some survived, maintaining their humanity throughout the ordeal. Dr. Frankl is suggesting, I think, that even though the concentration camps have been destroyed and the war is over, humanity remains locked up in a sort of invisible concentration camp.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Yes, you may be right. Some say the prevailing mood in the world today is one of powerlessness. Whatever the case may be, we are all aware that things cannot continue as they are. Yet decisions about political, economic and environmental issues all seem to be made somewhere beyond our reach. What can the individual accomplish in the face of the huge institutions that run our world? This feeling of powerlessness fuels a vicious cycle that only worsens the situation and increases people's sense of futility. 

&emsp;&emsp;At the opposite extreme of this sense of powerlessness lie the Lotus Sutra's philosophy of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life" and the application of this teaching to our daily lives. This principle teaches us that the inner determination of an individual can transform everything; it gives ultimate expression to the infinite potential and dignity inherent in each human life. 

<ins>Saito</ins>: We need to emphasize that the human being is not pitiful and powerless. Russian politician Aleksandr Yakovlev is often called the architect of the former Soviet Union's policy of perestroika. In response to the question, "Does Russia have a future?" he writes: "Today, even the most objective scientific rationalism teaches us that the human race faces certain destruction unless we recognize the value of every individual." [^5]

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: I last met Dr. Yakovlev in May 1994 in Moscow. He earnestly seeks the advent of a "Russian renaissance" centering on a restoration of human values. He has said:

> In the few remaining years of the twentieth century, the last illusions of the communism that we have known from the mid-nineteenth century will have been utterly destroyed. That is certain. At the same time, we will see a restoration of truly humane values. Until now, humane values have been, as a matter of active policy, completely overwhelmed by misunderstanding, lies and slander. Finally the time when they will be liberated has come. When we consider both the present and the future, we cannot escape the conclusion that the greatest crisis we face today is in the realm of spiritual ideals." [^6]

<ins>Saito</ins>: The Lotus Sutra constitutes the grandest and most sublime presentation of those humane values.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Yes, that is our firm conviction. There was a period in the history of the Holy Roman Empire called the Great Interregnum (1254-73). During that period the empire's throne was vacant for all practical purposes. Interestingly, this coincides with the period in which Nichiren Daishonin lived. 

&emsp;&emsp;Today, after the Cold War, we are living in a "Great Interreg- num of Philosophy," an era in which there is an absence of guiding philosophy. That is why this is precisely the time to speak of the Lotus Sutra, long known as the king of sutras.

<ins>Endo</ins>: The Lotus Sutra is the king and champion of all sutras. I fully agree we live in a Great Interregnum today in terms of philosophy. Faith in communism has disappeared, yet it is doubtful whether the newfound freedom of those liberated from its yoke really makes them happy. Instead, the worship of money, shallow materialism and mindless pleasure-seeking have spread across the globe.

<ins>Suda</ins>: I agree. President Václav Havel of the Czech Republic is renowned as a staunch campaigner against the oppression of the communist state. Mr. Havel warns of the changes that have been taking place in society after the liberation from communism: "The return of freedom to a society that was morally unhinged has produced...an enormous and dazzling explosion of every imaginable human vice.... We are witness to a bizarre state of affairs: society has freed itself, true, but in some ways it behaves worse than when it was in chains...." [^7]

<ins>Saito</ins>: Extreme nationalism is one of those vices. In unified Germany, for example, even though the neo-Nazi movement has only an extremely small number of supporters, calls for the exclusion of certain races are growing among the general populace. Some Germans even say the Berlin Wall should be rebuilt - but this time around the entire country, to keep foreigners out.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Yes, the roots of racism run deep. Movements to fan racial hatred for political, economic or religious advantage are always with us. The seriousness of this problem lies in that it is so closely tied to people's spiritual and emotional desires. In other words, we might say the desire for an identity - to know where one came from and where one is going - lies at the root of racism. People cannot withstand a vacuum of ideas; a philosophical and ideological void drives people to seek their identity in their race. 

&emsp;&emsp;That, of course, is one reason religion is important, but in reality religion often contributes to divisiveness.

<ins>Endo</ins>: Yasushi Akashi, special representative of the United Nations secretary-general assigned to the task of finding an end to the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, had this to say at the Sixth World Conference on Religion and Peace [November 1994]: "In the former republic of Yugoslavia, religion was appropriated and misused by intolerant racists. If religious leaders had been on the ball and had stood up before the conflict reached this stage, war could have been avoided." [^8]

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Mr. Akashi is a valued friend of mine. The war in the former Yugoslavia is a terrible tragedy. When I think of the people there, my heart breaks. Their country has become a living hell. One Bosnian poet commented: "The only things we can write in Sarajevo today are obituaries." [^9]

<ins>Saito</ins>: I have heard that when Orthodox Christian soldiers of the Serbian forces take Roman Catholic Croatian soldiers prisoner, they force them to perform the sign of the cross with three fingers, in the Orthodox fashion.

<ins>Suda</ins>: The Roman Catholic practice uses two fingers.

<ins>Saito</ins>: Yes. I have heard that if the prisoners refuse, their captors bind their fingers together with wire so that they cannot help but perform the sign of the cross with three fingers. Whether or not this is true, pictures of these prisoners are printed in Croatian newspapers. When Croatians see them, of course, their hatred for the Serbs is only fanned. [^10]

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Depending on the use to which it is put, religion can be a demonic force. Religion should bring us together, but it is exploited by some to create greater schisms among us. Nothing could be more unfortunate. 

&emsp;&emsp;Religion must always be for the people. People do not exist for the sake of religion. This must be the fundamental guideline of religion in the twenty-first century.

<ins>Endo</ins>: Dr. Anatoly Logunov, the renowned Russian physicist and former rector of Moscow State University, says that one lesson he learned from you, Mr. Ikeda, is that society exists for people and not the other way around. In the Soviet society of the past, he says, that was a shocking idea, because it represented a revival of humane values.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Such emphasis on the human being is the teaching of the Lotus Sutra; it is Buddhist humanism. 

&emsp;&emsp;We hear stories of the innocents of Sarajevo. One little girl was unable to leave her house for a year and a half. Amid the continuous shelling, even her own room was too dangerous to enter. The toilet and hallway were the safest parts of the house, and she once spent an entire month confined to this She had no running water, no electricity. Pieces of bodies blown apart by shell explosions lay strewn about her. In winter, temperatures dropped to -63 degrees F; she had neither wood nor a stove to burn it in. It was so cold that any water she had froze. She couldn't wash her face or hands. A trip to a public well would expose her to the peril of sniper fire. [^11]

&emsp;&emsp;A seventeen-year-old living under similar conditions writes: "I many dreams, but the war robbed me of all of them.... I don't know when it will be, but if I can love someone, if I still have the ability within myself, I would like to love someone. The most important thing, no matter what happens, is to be a human being, to remain a human being." [^12]

&emsp;&emsp;Peace must be a central premise in any discussion of the twenty-first century. Nothing is of any use without peace. That is one reason why religion in the twenty-first century must be a force for the creation of peace. Dr. Johan Galtung, the pioneering Norwegian peace researcher, has concluded that Buddhism is the most pacifistic religion. And the very essence of Buddhism is, of course, the Lotus Sutra.

<ins>Endo</ins>: The youth's fervent desire to remain human under such desperate circumstances is profoundly moving. As far as appearances are concerned, Japan seems a peaceful country. But I think I am not the only one who has grave doubts as to whether we Japanese have maintained our humanity.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Yes. And that is precisely why, wherever we are, it is necessary to begin with the revitalization of individual human beings. That is what we mean by the reformation of society and the world through human revolution. That is the teaching of the Lotus Sutra. And actions directed toward that end, I would like to stress, represent the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra.

<ins>Suda</ins>: Even a general overview of society reveals that we live in a period of great upheaval, a time of chaos - a "Great Interregnum of Philosophy" in which old systems of belief have reached a dead end. The world is becoming smaller and smaller, yet we know less and less in what direction to move. It is only natural that humanity today needs a basic standard to guide and lead it.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Actually, the Lotus Sutra is a scripture that shows its true brilliance in just such periods of great transition. The age in which the Lotus Sutra was first taught seems to have been similar. 

&emsp;&emsp;In Shakyamuni's India, the growth of cities began transcending the old tribal divisions, leading to a new age in which people would form new relationships and have to coexist symbiotically. It was a time of great intellectual confusion, with people espousing everything from pure materialism to hedonism to asceticism.

<ins>Suda</ins>: These are among the doctrines of the "six non-Buddhist teachers." [^13]

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: Yes. To bring humanity together in this period of great change, Shakyamuni taught new principles of integration. And the Lotus Sutra is the living essence of that teaching. 

&emsp;&emsp;Later in China and Japan, when religion was in chaos and people didn't know what to believe, the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai and Nichiren Daishonin advocated the Lotus Sutra's teachings and with it boldly confronted the issues of their respective eras and societies. The Lotus Sutra, one might say, represented the banner of unity with which they charged ahead in their struggles amid periods of great spiritual turbulence.

<ins>Suda</ins>: That reminds me of remarks made by Professor George Tanabe, chairman of the Department of Religion at the University of Hawaii. The department he heads is known around the world for its comparative studies of Eastern and Western religions. 

&emsp;&emsp;In a recent interview with the Seikyo Shimbun, the Soka Gakkai daily newspaper, Dr. Tanabe stated that as a doctrine of the universal and the eternal, the Lotus Sutra holds an unrivaled place in the Buddhist canon. We could learn much, he said, by looking into why the Lotus Sutra has been "so successful in speaking to and having meaning for so many different people, in so many different places, so many different cultures and so many different times."The "one vehicle" of the Lotus Sutra, Dr. Tanabe stressed, should be understood as meaning that it embraces all other vehicles, all other ways. 

&emsp;&emsp;This, he said, offers a very important message for people today, namely, that "we live in one world, on one planet and are really one people." He was of the opinion that the Lotus Sutra is a universal text for all people that readily can be translated into different cultural contexts.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: This is indeed an astute assessment of the contemporary significance of the Lotus Sutra. The Lotus Sutra - "the scripture of the lotus blossom of the Law," as its Japanese name indicates - is the king of sutras. A king does not negate the existence of others; his role is to bring out the full potential of all. Nichiren Daishonin writes:

> Ultimately, all phenomena are contained within one's life, down to the last particle of dust. The nine mountains and the eight seas are encompassed in one's body, and the sun, moon, and myriad stars are found in one's life. We, however, are like a blind person who is incapable of seeing the images reflected in a mirror, or like an infant who has no fear of water or fire. The teachings such as those of the non-Buddhist writings and those of the Hinayana and provisional Mahayana Buddhist scriptures all partially explain the phenomena inherent in one's life. They do not explain them as the Lotus Sutra does. Thus, among the sutras, there are both superior and inferior, and among people also, sages and worthies may be distinguished. [(WND-1, 629)](https://www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/wnd-1/Content/75#para-3)

&emsp;&emsp;All philosophies other than the Lotus Sutra are fragments, expressing nothing more than a partial view of the great law of life. Basing ourselves on such fragments, even though they may contain partial truths, will not enable us to realize a thoroughgoing revitalization of our lives. Indeed, philosophies that expound only partial truths end up distorting our lives. The Lotus Sutra, on the other hand, teaches the one fundamental Law that unifies all these fragmentary teachings, gives them proper perspective, and allows each to shine and fulfill its function within the whole. That is the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra. 

&emsp;&emsp;In the "Life Span" chapter, we find mention of "a skilled physician who is wise and understanding" [(LSOC, 268)](https://www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/lsoc/Content/16#para-18). Like a skilled doctor, the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra saves those who are suffering and in pain.

<ins>Endo</ins>: Later the sutra says of those saved by this wisdom: "Constantly harboring such feelings of grief, they at last come to their senses..." [(LSOC, 270)](https://www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/lsoc/Content/16#para-24). What exactly is the wisdom that enabled them to do so?

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: If there was an easy answer to your question, we'd have no need for this discussion! However, to cut to the conclusion, "they at last come to their senses" means that they finally awoke to the truth that each of them has always been a Buddha from the eternal past and will always be a Buddha into the eternal future. Of course, this realization is not a sudden, simple "Oh, I see." 

&emsp;&emsp;The Lotus Sutra is an attempt to teach this truth to all in an easily comprehensible fashion. Nichiren Daishonin, the votary of the Lotus Sutra in the Latter Day of the Law, [^14] made it possible for all to embody this truth in their daily lives. The Lotus Sutra teaches of the great hidden treasure of the heart, as vast as the universe itself, which dispels any feelings of powerlessness. It teaches a dynamic way of living in which we breathe the immense life of the universe itself. It teaches the true great adventure of self-reformation. The Lotus Sutra has the breadth and scope to embrace all people on the way to peace. It has the fragrance of magnificent culture and art. It leads us to an unsurpassed state of life imbued with the qualities of eternity, happiness, true self and purity, [^15] so that wherever we are, we may say, "This, my land, remains safe and tranquil" [(LSOC, 272)](https://www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/lsoc/Content/16#para-77). 

&emsp;&emsp;The Lotus Sutra has the drama of fighting for justice against evil. It has a warmth that comforts the weary. It has a vibrant, pulsing courage that drives away fear. It has a chorus of joy at attaining absolute freedom throughout past, present and future. It has the soaring flight of liberty. It has brilliant light, flowers, greenery, music, paintings, vivid stories. It offers unsurpassed lessons on psychology, the workings of the human heart; lessons on life; lessons on happiness; and lessons on peace. It maps out the basic rules for good health. It awakens us to the universal truth that a change in one's heart can transform everything.

&emsp;&emsp;It is neither the parched desert of individualism nor the prison of totalitarianism; it has the power to manifest a pure land of compassion, in which people complement and encourage one another. 

&emsp;&emsp;Both communism and capitalism have used people as means for their own ends. But in the Lotus Sutra — the king of sutras — we find a fundamental humanism in which people are the goal and purpose, in which they are both protagonist and sovereign. Perhaps we could call this teaching of the Lotus Sutra a "cosmic humanism."

<ins>Saito</ins>: Yes, I agree. I think we can draw a clear distinction between cosmic humanism and anthropocentrism — a human-centered view of the universe-which has dominated until now and to which many other life forms have been sacrificed.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: I think it is a lofty and powerful designation that will serve as a standard for the twenty-first century. In any case, wisdom and acquiring wisdom are important. We will discuss the relationship between wisdom and knowledge in later chapters, but a British author once wrote: "It is better to have wisdom without learning, than learning without wisdom; just as it is better to be rich with- out being the possessor of a mine, than to be the possessor of a mine without being rich." [^16] 

&emsp;&emsp;Of course, it is ideal to possess both wisdom and knowledge, but everything ultimately depends on wisdom. Our goal is happiness, and happiness cannot be attained through knowledge alone. The only way to realize true human happiness and prosperity in the twenty-first century, therefore, is to make it a century of wisdom. 

&emsp;&emsp;Though knowledge can be transmitted from one person to ano- ther, wisdom cannot. The only way to develop wisdom is to acquire it through personal experience. That is one reason the Lotus Sutra places such strong emphasis on the teacher-disciple relationship — a relationship in which both parties involve themselves wholly, with every facet of their being.

<ins>Endo</ins>: Our relationship with the Buddhist scriptures must also be one of total engagement; it is not just an intellectual relationship. This principle also applies to how we live.

<ins>Suda</ins>: The awakening President Toda attained during his imprisonment was also a result of his desperate quest for the essence of the Lotus Sutra.

<ins>Saito</ins>: His realization that "the Buddha is life itself" became the starting point for the contemporary revitalization of the Lotus Sutra, which many regarded as merely an ancient text with no practical relevance to the present day. That realization is, I believe, the profound and eternal foundation of the SGI.

<ins>Ikeda</ins>: I agree. In the next chapter, let's begin by considering the significance of Mr. Toda's enlightenment to the essence of the Lotus Sutra. How should we read the Lotus Sutra? In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin says: "The four characters permeate the entire sutra from beginning to end. The meaning behind each and every word and phrase of the twenty-eight chapters of the sutra refers to the hearing of this doctrine as it applies to one's own self, and this is summed up in the words 'This is what I heard.' This thing that is heard is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" [(OTT, 222)](https://www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/ott/Separate-Transmission/2#para-7). 

&emsp;&emsp;Each passage and phrase of the Lotus Sutra is teaching about oneself, the entity of the Mystic Law. The sutra is not discussing something far removed from our own lives. 

&emsp;&emsp;In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin instructs us how to read the Lotus Sutra from that fundamental standpoint. Deeply and carefully studying the Orally Transmitted Teachings with the assistance of your sharp young minds, let us begin this challenging journey to explore the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra for the coming age. It is a journey to the truth that we ourselves are Buddhas. Life is an endless odyssey into the innermost sanctum of our own lives.

&emsp;&emsp;German author and poet Hermann Hesse advocated the need for a revolution in consciousness. He was keenly aware of this century's malaise. His poem "Bücher" (Books) is instructive in our exploration of the Lotus Sutra:

> All the books in the world  
> Will not bring you happiness,  
> But they will quietly lead you  
> Back inside yourself.  
> There you will find all you need,  
> Sun, stars and moon,  
> For the light for which you search  
> Dwells within you.  
> The wisdom you so long sought  
> In books,  
> Will then shine forth from every page -  
> For now that wisdom has become your own. [^17]

<ins>Saito</ins>: In these discussions, we hope to study the Lotus Sutra from various perspectives. Indeed, it is imperative that we do so. Through our diligent studies, we hope to strengthen our conviction that the Lotus Sutra is the core philosophy for twenty-first century leaders.

**Notes**

[^1]: Translated from Japanese: Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, Jinsei ni imi wo, trans. Kazutami Watanabi (Tokyo: Misuzu Shobo, 1987) p. 173.
[^2]: Daisaku Ikeda, The Human Revolution (Santa Monica, CA: World Tribune Press, 2004), p. 233.
[^3]: Translated from Japanese: Victor E. Frankl, Soredemo jinsei ni iesu to iu, trans. Kunio Yamada and Mike Matsuda (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1993), p. 7, see V.E. Frankl, ... Trotzdem Ja zum Leben sagen (...Still Say Yes to Life) (Wien: Franz Deuticke, 1947).
[^4]: Ibid., 10.
[^5]: Translated from Japanese: Aleksandr N.Yakovlev, Rekishi no gen'ei (Illusions of History), trans. Koji Hitachi (Tokyo: Nihon Kezai Shimbunsha, 1993), p. 364.
[^6]: Ibid., 378.
[^7]: Václav Havel, Summer Meditations, trans. Paul Wilson (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), pp. 1-2.
[^8]: Tokyo Shimbun (Tokyo Newspaper), November 17, 1994.
[^9]: Translated from Japanese: Juan Goytisolo, Saraevo nooto (Guaderno de Sarajevo), trans. Yoshiko Yamamichi (Tokyo: Misuzu Shobo, 1994), p. 114.
[^10]: Kyoko Gendatsu and Eiji Inagawa, Ushinawareta shishunki (Lost Adolescence: Messages from Sarajevo) (Tokyo: Michi Shobo, 1994), p. 62.
[^11]: Ibid., 96-98.
[^12]: Ibid., 272-73.
[^13]: Six non-Buddhist teachers: Influential thinkers in India during Shakyamuni's lifetime who openly broke with the old Vedic tradition and challenged Brahman authority in the Indian social order.
[^14]: Latter Day of the Law: The last of the three periods following Shakyamuni's death, when Buddhism falls into confusion and Shakyamuni's teachings lose the power to lead people to enlightenment. It is said to correspond to the present age.
[^15]: Eternity, happiness, true self, purity: The "four virtues" or noble qualities of the Buddha's life, expounded in the Nirvana Sutra. Because common mortals possess the Buddha nature, they, too, can develop these four virtues when they attain Buddhahood by fulfilling the Buddha's teaching.
[^16]: C.C. Colton, Lacon: Many Things in Few Words (London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown and Green, 1829), vol. 2, p. 18.
[^17]: Translated from German: Hermann Hesse,"Bücher" (Books), Trost de Nacht: Neue Gedichte von Hermann Hesse (Berlin: G. Fischer), p. 60.
